Execution Inference: Deriving Deterministic Event Coordination from Application Object Graphs
Abstract
Event-driven systems at the edge, such as autonomous drones and high-frequency trading platforms, require strict determinism and microsecond latency. Traditional runtime dispatch infrastructures struggle to meet these constraints, introducing overhead and cognitive load through dynamic routing and manual orchestration. We present Fluxtion, a system that compiles closed event dependency graphs into deterministic execution pipelines by inferring execution schedules directly from structural dependencies. In such systems, execution paths are an emergent property of the dependency structure rather than the result of explicitly authored orchestration logic. Fluxtion exploits this property through a compilation process we call execution inference, which derives propagation order, dependency guards, and dispatch structure from the event graph and generates specialized execution code. The resulting runtime eliminates general-purpose runtime dispatch structures and replaces them with a statically generated execution schedule. Evaluation against RxJava 3 demonstrates nanosecond-scale event processing with zero heap allocation in steady state, near-flat tail latency (p99.9 within 5% of median), selective propagation advantages at scale, and a ~1,426× throughput improvement on dense diamond-mesh topologies where glitch-free propagation eliminates exponential re-computation. In production, this predictable architecture can materially reduce development and debugging effort; by enabling deterministic replay and automated regression testing, Fluxtion was associated with a reduction in delivery time from approximately six man-months to five man-days in one internal project.

CCS Concepts
• Computer systems organization → Real-time systems; Embedded systems;
• Software and its engineering → Compilers; Event-driven architectures;
• Theory of computation → Program analysis.

Keywords
Deterministic Execution, Event-Driven Architecture, AOT Compilation, Low-Latency, Execution Inference

ACM Reference Format
[Author(s)]. 2026. Execution Inference: Deriving Deterministic Event Coordination from Application Object Graphs. In Proceedings of the 20th International Conference on Distributed and Event-Based Systems (DEBS '26). ACM, New York, NY, USA. https://doi.org/10.1145/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1. Introduction
Modern event-driven architectures, particularly those governing autonomous systems and algorithmic trading, often incur substantial integration complexity. As these systems grow, developers are frequently forced to manually assemble execution pipelines using callbacks, message routing, or rule-based orchestration logic. This manually written coordination logic, often treated as infrastructural “plumbing” or “glue code,” is a major source of technical debt. Industry analyses on system integration estimate that such infrastructural plumbing can consume a large fraction of a complex distributed system's codebase [8].
This manual coordination logic creates several practical problems. First, as the number of components and event paths scales, developers must reason about increasingly complex global state and asynchronous interactions. Second, manually assembled execution paths are prone to wiring errors, including missed state updates and unintended coordination behavior. Third, evolving the system often requires extensive rewiring of brittle orchestration logic, which increases regression risk and slows feature development.
The core issue lies in the dispatch mechanism: traditional runtime infrastructure must dynamically determine which handlers should execute and in what order. This leads to unpredictable latency jitter, cache misses, and non-deterministic behavior under load. In edge environments where microsecond reactions are critical, this abstraction tax can be prohibitive.
In conventional event-driven systems, execution order is often resolved at runtime through observers, listeners, or dynamic dispatch. As the number of components and interactions grows, reasoning about global behavior becomes increasingly difficult. Fluxtion addresses this by treating coordination as a compilation problem rather than a runtime concern. Execution inference analyzes the closed dependency graph, derives a rank-ordered execution schedule and propagation paths, and generates the corresponding runtime before event processing begins. This separates application logic from manually authored coordination code.
We present Fluxtion, a solution designed to eliminate the non-determinism and cognitive load inherent in complex event-processing networks. Fluxtion observes that in many practical systems, the set of components and their dependencies are known ahead of time. In such systems, execution paths are an emergent property of the dependency structure rather than the result of explicitly authored orchestration logic.
A key distinction of Fluxtion is that the coordination logic of the system is not written explicitly by the developer. Unlike many event-processing frameworks, Fluxtion does not require developers to define the coordination structure of the event pipeline through configuration graphs, domain-specific languages (DSLs), or runtime registration of handlers. Instead, the compiler infers the execution intent directly from the structural relationships between standard application components. In effect, the application's object graph is the coordination model. This eliminates the need to maintain a separate coordination language, prevents drift between system configuration and implementation, and frees developers from having to reason about global event routing.
Fluxtion exploits this property through a compilation process we call execution inference. By deriving propagation order, dependency guards, and dispatch structure directly from the event graph, the compiler generates specialized deterministic execution code. Shifting coordination from the developer to the compiler reduces the amount of manually authored infrastructure code, removes a class of wiring errors associated with hand-assembled pipelines, and simplifies the addition of new behavioral nodes. Execution inference differs from prior approaches in that it eliminates the need for an explicitly authored coordination model entirely: both the dependency structure and the execution semantics are inferred directly from conventional object composition.
The contribution of this paper is therefore not only a low-latency execution architecture, but also an operational model that improves reproducibility, debugging, and testability in production event-driven systems. We demonstrate this approach in a production system, showing that structurally closed event graphs can be compiled into deterministic execution engines with measurable performance and operational benefits.
This paper makes the following contributions:
• A compilation model (execution inference) that derives event coordination — propagation order, dependency guards, and dispatch structure — directly from conventional application object graphs, without requiring an explicit coordination language, DSL, or dataflow API.
• A deterministic execution architecture (the Specialized Execution Graph) that eliminates all runtime dispatch structures and executes events through predictable, zero-allocation pipelines.
• A selective propagation mechanism that combines a statically compiled execution schedule with low-overhead dynamic guards, enabling O(1) propagation arrest at graph root nodes.
• An empirical evaluation across eight benchmark dimensions and one production-representative validation benchmark demonstrating the performance characteristics, trade-offs, and operational benefits of execution inference in production deployments.

2. Execution Inference
In a structurally closed event graph, dependencies between components fully determine the ordering constraints required for correct execution. Execution inference is the process of deriving event entry projections, dependency ordering, and propagation semantics directly from a structurally closed object graph at compile time. Execution inference exploits this property by transforming the directed dependency graph into a flat, deterministic execution schedule.
Intuitively, execution inference converts a graph of dependencies into a precomputed "execution trace" for each event type. Let the system be formally defined as a directed acyclic graph $G=(V,E)$, where vertices $V$ represent computational components and edges $E$ represent structural dependencies. For any dependency edge $(u, v) \in E$, component $v$ depends on the output of component $u$.
While standard execution models attempt to resolve this graph dynamically, Fluxtion leverages the structure of $G$ to synthesize distinct execution paths at compile time. Let $\mathcal{T}$ be the set of all event types in the system. The compiler formally defines an event entry point as a tuple $\varepsilon = (T, \phi, H)$, where $T \in \mathcal{T}$ is the event type, $\phi$ is an optional predicate filter, and $H \subseteq V$ is the specific set of nodes annotated to handle this filtered event.
For each entry point $\varepsilon$, the compiler projects a specific event propagation subgraph $G_T = (V_T, E_T)$. Here, $V_T$ consists of the handlers in $H$ together with the nodes participating in the corresponding dependency chain for that event, while $E_T$ contains the structural edges connecting them. To derive a valid execution ordering for this specific event, the compiler performs a topological sort [9] exclusively on $G_T$. Fluxtion assigns each node a rank corresponding to its dependency depth:
$$Rank(v) = \max_{u \in Inbound(v)} (Rank(u)) + 1$$
where $Rank(u) = 0$ for all root nodes $u$ with no inbound edges.
To illustrate: for a three-node chain A → B → C, where A handles an incoming event and C depends transitively on A via B, the compiler assigns Rank(A) = 0, Rank(B) = 1, Rank(C) = 2. The execution path π(ε) is the linear sequence [A, B, C], and the generated dispatch routine calls each node exactly once in that order with no runtime graph traversal.
This produces a deterministic, topologically sorted execution path $\pi(\varepsilon)$ for every distinct entry point. The rank ordering ensures glitch-free propagation because all dependencies of a node are evaluated before the node itself executes. In traditional reactive systems, propagation may occur through asynchronous callbacks or observer notifications, which can introduce intermediate inconsistent states. In contrast, the inferred execution path $\pi(\varepsilon)$ guarantees that each node observes a stable, fully resolved upstream state.
The output of this analysis is the Specialized Execution Graph (SEG). The SEG acts as a concrete unrolling of the DAG. Rather than maintaining a graph data structure in memory at runtime, the SEG translates the logical dependencies into a linear sequence of imperative operations representing $\pi(\varepsilon)$. While the scheduling itself relies on standard topological ordering, the distinguishing aspect of execution inference is that the dependency graph and propagation semantics are derived automatically from the structural relationships between application components rather than being explicitly specified by the developer. Unlike systems such as Apache Flink or Kafka Streams — which require developers to compose explicit dataflow DAGs using framework-specific APIs — or reactive frameworks such as RxJava — which require explicit operator composition chains — or synchronous dataflow languages such as Lustre or Esterel — which require an explicit program graph specification — Fluxtion infers both the dependency structure and the execution semantics directly from conventional object graphs, eliminating the coordination language entirely. The application's structure is the coordination model. At its core, Fluxtion reframes event-driven execution as a compilation problem: coordination is not programmed but inferred, and the object graph itself becomes the executable specification of system behavior.
(Insert Figure 1: "Dependency Graph vs. Specialized Execution Graph." A visual representation contrasting a structurally closed event graph with its compiled counterpart, illustrating the extraction of emergent paths into a linear, flat schedule.)


3. Graph Realization and Compilation Pipeline
Graph realization bridges the gap between the application structure and the formally inferred execution model. The execution inference compilation pipeline proceeds through four conceptual phases: (1) discovery of the object dependency graph through compile-time structural introspection, (2) enumeration of event entry points from annotated handlers, (3) synthesis of topologically ordered execution paths for each entry point, and (4) generation of the specialized event processor.
During the graph realization phase, the Fluxtion compiler inspects the application object graph using reflection and annotation metadata. This structural introspection is performed without requiring a custom Domain Specific Language (DSL) or an explicit graph builder API. Components declare dependencies structurally—through field references, constructor parameters, or method annotations that indicate the flow of event data between nodes. The compiler extracts these relationships to construct the initial dependency graph. The introspection occurs entirely during the AOT compilation phase; the runtime event processor contains no reflective calls. In typical deployments, the graph analysis and code generation phase completes within a few seconds, allowing processors to be regenerated frequently during development.
This approach inherently relies on a closed-world assumption: the entire dependency structure must be known to the compiler ahead of runtime. This is a deliberate architectural trade-off. It trades dynamic runtime flexibility for deterministic execution guarantees, dramatically reduced coordination overhead, and simpler, static reasoning about system behavior. Many production systems — including algorithmic trading strategies, embedded control loops, and inference pipelines at the edge — are structurally closed at deployment time: the set of components and their dependencies is fixed and fully known before the system is launched. In such contexts, dynamic reconfiguration is either disallowed by operational constraints or governed through a separate deployment pipeline that regenerates the processor. Treating the closed-world assumption as a design constraint rather than a limitation enables static compilation, deployment-time regeneration of the execution schedule whenever the component graph evolves, and structural guarantees — zero allocation, glitch-free propagation, deterministic replay — that are impossible to provide in dynamically composable systems.
Before lowering this graph into the SEG, the compiler performs rigorous graph validation. It enforces acyclic constraints within a single event cycle, detecting any circular dependencies that would violate deterministic scheduling. Graph realization therefore produces a validated, closed intermediate representation (IR) from which the execution schedule can be inferred, capturing the complete event propagation structure of the application.
While the precomputed schedule represents the absolute dependency ordering of the system, not every event activates the entire graph. Fluxtion addresses this via selective sub-graph propagation. The compiler transforms declarative semantics into boolean propagation flags tracked during the event cycle. Execution strictly follows the precomputed path $\pi(\varepsilon)$ but evaluates these low-overhead guards at each step. This sub-graph pruning ensures that downstream computation occurs only when upstream state actively changes, blending the safety of a static schedule with the efficiency of dynamic data-aware routing.


4. Runtime Architecture
The validated Intermediate Representation (IR) is designed to be largely platform-neutral. Because the compiler operates over an intermediate representation that is not tied to a single backend, the inferred execution schedule is not inherently tied to a single execution strategy. In production deployments, Fluxtion has been used with multiple execution backends, including generated source code for different target languages (e.g., Java or native C++) as well as interpreted dispatchers.
For JVM targets, the Fluxtion Ahead-of-Time (AOT) compiler generates a specialized event processor that executes the inferred execution schedule. Traditional event frameworks typically rely on runtime dispatch structures such as handler registries, subscription maps, callback lists, or type-based dispatch. In contrast, Fluxtion synthesizes a specialized event processor—a "flat dispatcher" architecture consisting of a linear sequence of guarded, monomorphic method invocations that entirely eliminates runtime handler lookup, observer registries, and dynamic event routing.
To illustrate the nature of this compiled architecture, consider the generated execution logic shown in Listing 1, representing the concrete realization of path $\pi(\varepsilon)$ for a standard market data pipeline:
// Listing 1: Simplified generated dispatch routine.
public void onEvent(PriceEvent e) {
    midCalc.onEvent(e);

    if(midCalc.isDirty()) {
        skewCalc.onUpdate();
        levelCalc.onUpdate();
    }

    if(skewCalc.isDirty() || levelCalc.isDirty()) {
        publisher.publish();
    }
}

This linear dispatch routine is specifically engineered for the JVM's Just-In-Time (JIT) compiler. Because the invocation targets are known statically, the JIT compiler benefits from strictly monomorphic call sites, entirely avoiding the overhead of virtual method table (vtable) lookups typical in polymorphic observer patterns. Furthermore, the compiled dirty-state checks allow modern CPUs to achieve highly predictable branching behavior.
Beyond event propagation, this structural knowledge enables predictable lifecycle ordering through dual ordering. The compiler calculates a Forward Order $\sigma$ derived directly from the topological sort of $G$ for system initialization, ensuring dependencies are initialized before their dependents. Conversely, it computes a Reverse Order $\sigma'$ for teardown sequences, guaranteeing that dependent nodes are safely destroyed before their underlying dependencies.
This compiled execution pipeline is explicitly designed for mechanical sympathy — the practice of writing software to align with the physical characteristics of the underlying hardware —, achieving good L1/L2 cache locality and highly effective instruction pre-fetching. During steady-state execution, the runtime operates exclusively on preallocated component instances. This zero-allocation memory strategy removes garbage collection pressure entirely, avoiding GC-induced latency spikes and resulting in highly predictable execution bounds.
While the primary model uses pull-based propagation to minimize allocation, the system optionally supports push-based triggers and asynchronous boundaries for non-deterministic auxiliary tasks.



5. Performance Evaluation
We evaluate the performance characteristics of compiled execution pipelines against RxJava 3 (PublishSubject / PublishProcessor / Flowable operator chains) as the reactive baseline. The goal is to quantify the practical performance implications of execution inference across multiple graph topologies, measuring event processing latency, memory allocation, and selective propagation overhead. Critically, this evaluation reports all benchmark dimensions including those in which the compiled approach incurs overhead relative to the reactive baseline, so that the architectural trade-offs are understood precisely.
5.1 Evaluation Scope and Fairness
This evaluation compares in-process event dispatch cost: the per-event latency of processing a single event through a graph of application nodes in the same JVM process. We do not evaluate distributed semantics, backpressure, or asynchronous operator scheduling; these are design concerns for which RxJava 3 is explicitly designed and for which Fluxtion is not a substitute.
RxJava 3 (PublishSubject / PublishProcessor / Flowable operator chains) is selected as the baseline because it is a widely adopted, production-quality reactive library representing the dominant in-process reactive dispatch model. It is not selected to inflate Fluxtion's advantage — indeed, as Tables 5 and 6 demonstrate, RxJava's JIT-optimized operator chains consistently outperform Fluxtion on simple linear topologies.
The mutable event reuse strategy (a single pre-allocated event object updated in-place per invocation) is a structural requirement of zero-allocation dispatch and cannot be safely applied to RxJava operator chains, which hold references to upstream emissions across operator boundaries. This is not a benchmark bias; it is an intentional architectural constraint of the Fluxtion model. The evaluation therefore compares two distinct design points in the dispatch-cost space, not two implementations of the same design.

5.2 Experimental Setup
Benchmarks were conducted using the Java Microbenchmark Harness (JMH 1.37) to ensure accurate steady-state measurement. All experiments were performed on JDK 25.0.2 (GraalVM) with a single fork, three warmup iterations of one second each, and five measurement iterations of one second each in average-time mode (ns/op, lower is better). The hardware environment consisted of an isolated Intel Core i7 processor to minimize OS-level interference. All Fluxtion benchmarks pre-allocate a single strongly-typed mutable event object per event type in the JMH @State class and update its fields in-place before each invocation, ensuring the processor performs no heap allocation during dispatch.
We evaluated seven benchmark dimensions that isolate distinct properties of the compiled execution model:

Table 2: Benchmark Dimensions
Dimension | Topology | Sizes Tested | Property Validated
deep_path | Linear chain | 5–100 nodes | Raw latency scaling with depth
hot_path | Fan-out branches | 2–32 branches | Selective sub-graph propagation
dirty_filter | Linear chain, 90% events suppressed | 10–100 nodes | Propagation arrest at root
intermediate_handlers | Chain with distributed entry points | 10–100 nodes | Multiple @OnEventHandler entry points
multi_event_path | Three disjoint chains, one processor | 5–50 nodes | Per-event-type dispatch cost
polymorphic | Chain of mixed node subclasses | 5–100 nodes | JIT monomorphism vs. megamorphic dispatch
diamond_mesh | 10×10 fully connected diamond mesh | 101 nodes | Glitch-free propagation correctness
validation | Three diamond chains of different depths, one processor | sizes 3–10 | Multi-event-type pre-computed path selection

5.3 Glitch-Free Propagation: Diamond Mesh Topology
The most structurally significant result arises in the diamond mesh topology, which directly measures the glitch problem intrinsic to reactive observer-based frameworks. In a densely connected mesh, a single upstream event activates multiple converging paths to each downstream node. RxJava propagates the event independently along every upstream path, causing each shared downstream node to execute once per incoming path rather than once per event cycle. This produces exponential work growth with connection density. Because Fluxtion's topological sort assigns each node a unique rank and visits it exactly once per event cycle regardless of how many upstream paths converge on it, glitch-free propagation is a structural guarantee of the compiled execution schedule rather than a runtime coordination policy.

Table 3: Diamond Mesh — Glitch-Free Propagation (10×10 mesh, 101 nodes)
Fluxtion (ns/op) | RxJava (ns/op) | Speedup
**196.8** | **280,546.0** | **~1,426×  ← KEY RESULT**

The approximately 1,426-fold throughput difference is a consequence of algorithmic complexity rather than constant-factor optimization. RxJava's propagation work scales with the number of converging paths; Fluxtion's scales with the number of nodes. More precisely: in the 10×10 mesh, each of the 100 non-root nodes is reachable via multiple converging upstream paths. RxJava dispatches to a node once per triggered upstream path, so a node with k converging paths executes k times per event cycle instead of once. In the measured mesh this produces substantially more total node activations per event cycle in RxJava than in Fluxtion, reflecting O(paths) rather than O(|V|) work — RxJava work ∝ number of convergent paths; Fluxtion work ∝ |V|. This is an O(paths) versus O(|V|) algorithmic difference arising from the presence or absence of glitch-free propagation, not a constant-factor optimization gap. This result directly validates the core correctness claim of execution inference: the inferred execution path $\pi(\varepsilon)$ guarantees that each node observes a fully resolved upstream state, evaluated exactly once per event cycle.

5.4 Allocation Behavior
A critical requirement for deterministic edge systems is the elimination of Stop-the-World Garbage Collection pauses. Using JMH's -prof gc memory profiler, we measured the steady-state heap allocation rate across all benchmark dimensions. RxJava operators hold references to upstream emissions across asynchronous operator boundaries; a single pre-allocated mutable event cannot be safely reused across the pipeline without risking state corruption, so a new event wrapper is created per invocation. RxJava allocation ranged from a few hundred bytes per operation on shallow paths (136 B/op at deep_path depth 5, 232 B/op for the shallow validation control chain) to multiple kilobytes on deeper topologies (1,264 B/op at deep_path depth 100, 2,537 B/op for intermediate_handlers at size 100, 1,344 B/op for the full market-data validation chain), reaching approximately 286 KB/op on the 10×10 diamond mesh. This allocation arises from event wrappers, boxed intermediate values, operator coordination state, and per-layer stream infrastructure that accumulate with chain depth.
Fluxtion achieved ≈0 B/op in steady-state execution across all dimensions. The generated processor stores all component instances as final fields initialized once at construction time. The compiled dispatch routine interacts exclusively with these pre-allocated instances via in-place field reads and writes, applying zero pressure to the heap during event processing. This zero-allocation property is not a tuning artifact but a structural consequence of the closed-world compilation model: because all components and their relationships are fixed at compile time, no runtime data structures need to be created or managed during dispatch.

5.5 Selective Propagation: Conditional Dispatch at Scale
To evaluate the efficiency of the propagation guards described in Section 3, we benchmarked the dirty_filter dimension in which 90% of events carry a DISABLE command that causes the root handler to return false, arresting all downstream computation immediately. RxJava must still propagate each event through the reactive stream before each filter() operator can evaluate and discard it, so suppression cost accumulates linearly with graph depth. Fluxtion's compiled guard is evaluated once at the root; if the root's dirty flag is false, no downstream node executes.

Table 4: Dirty Filter — Conditional Propagation (90% events suppressed)
Graph size | Fluxtion (ns/op) | Fluxtion B/op | RxJava (ns/op) | RxJava B/op | Fluxtion speedup
10 | 52.5 | ≈0 | 73.1 | 256 | 1.4×
20 | 59.2 | ≈0 | 93.3 | 424 | 1.6×
50 | 76.6 | ≈0 | 182.5 | 904 | 2.4×
100 | 98.2 | ≈0 | 558.8 | 1,697 | 5.7×

Fluxtion's latency grows slowly with graph size because the compiled guard short-circuits before any downstream work is performed; the incremental cost per additional node is the cost of one additional stack frame in the generated method, not an additional traversal step. RxJava's latency grows approximately linearly because each suppressed event must travel the full depth of the operator chain before being discarded. The intermediate_handlers dimension confirms the same scaling pattern: Fluxtion's compiled merge of multiple @OnEventHandler entry points consistently outperforms RxJava's Flowable.merge() equivalent at all tested sizes (1.5× at size 10, 2.1× at size 20, 2.6× at size 50, 2.8× at size 100).

5.6 Multi-Event-Type Path Selection: Pre-Computed Variable-Length Paths
Production event-driven systems are never uniform in event type or processing depth. A market-making platform simultaneously processes high-frequency market data ticks traversing a deep computation graph, periodic trade execution signals following a medium-length path, and infrequent control commands processed by a short administrative chain. Fluxtion's execution inference compiles a distinct, minimal execution schedule for each event type at build time. When a market event arrives, only the market-path nodes execute; control nodes are structurally absent from that schedule. This is not runtime filtering — the alternative paths do not exist in the generated dispatch code for the non-matching event type.

The validation benchmark evaluates this property directly. A single compiled Fluxtion processor handles three distinct event types — ValidationMarketEvent, ValidationTradeEvent, and ValidationControlEvent — each activating a separately pre-computed diamond-chain subgraph of a different depth. At parameter size=N, the market data chain has N layers, the trade chain has N/2 layers, and the control chain has N/3 layers. Each layer contains three nodes connected in a converging diamond pattern. At size 10 this produces pre-computed paths of approximately 32, 17, and 11 active nodes respectively, all served by a single compiled processor class. The equivalent RxJava topology uses three independent PublishSubject sources feeding separate Observable.zip() chains. In this benchmark, zip() is required to ensure correct behavior at convergent nodes — without it, a downstream node would fire once per upstream path rather than once per event cycle, reproducing the glitch problem.

Table 7: Multi-Event-Type Path Selection — One Processor, Three Pre-Computed Paths (size=10)
Event type | Chain depth | Fluxtion (ns/op) | Fluxtion B/op | RxJava (ns/op) | RxJava B/op | Speedup
Control | ~11 nodes | 84 | ≈0 | 185 | 352 | 2.2×
Trade | ~17 nodes | 133 | ≈0 | 442 | 624 | 3.3×
Market | ~32 nodes | 244 | ≈0 | 968 | 1,344 | 4.0×

Three properties distinguish this result from the simple chain baselines. First, the Fluxtion advantage grows with chain depth: the deepest chain (market data, ~32 nodes) shows the largest speedup (4.0×) and the shallowest (control, ~11 nodes) the smallest (2.2×). This is the opposite trend from the simple linear baselines, where RxJava outperforms Fluxtion on shallow chains. The inversion occurs because Fluxtion's per-event dispatch cost scales with the number of nodes in that event type's pre-computed path, while RxJava's zip() coordination overhead accumulates a fixed allocation budget per layer regardless of event frequency or path depth.

Second, Fluxtion achieves ≈0 B/op across all three event types at all sizes. Processing a deep market-data path does not allocate even though trade and control chains are registered in the same processor. The compiled schedules are structurally isolated: no shared runtime data structures connect them. RxJava's allocation scales with chain depth — 352 B/op for the shallow control chain rising to 1,344 B/op for the full market data chain — reflecting the accumulation of zip() coordinator objects and boxed Double wrappers at each layer.

Third, this benchmark validates the core execution-inference claim at the system level. The developer writes three Java classes annotated with @OnEventHandler for their respective event types, connects them as fields, and Fluxtion infers that they form three structurally distinct chains requiring three structurally distinct pre-computed dispatch paths. No routing configuration, no stream composition API, no explicit merge or filter declarations are required. This topology is representative of every production deployment described in this paper: the 150-node drone autonomy processor handles telemetry, navigation, and alert events each on their own pre-computed path, at ≈0 B/op across all event types.

5.7 Tail Latency and Jitter
For latency-sensitive edge and trading systems, tail latency (p99, p99.9) is often more critical than median latency. We therefore examined latency distributions using HDR histograms collected during steady-state benchmark runs.

Fluxtion exhibits near-flat latency distributions across all evaluated dimensions. In steady-state execution, p99.9 latency remains within approximately 2–5% of the median (p50), reflecting the absence of allocation and the use of a fixed, cache-resident execution schedule. Because the compiled dispatch path creates no heap objects during event processing, there is no mechanism within the event processing path by which allocation-induced GC pauses introduce latency spikes at the tail.

In contrast, RxJava shows substantial tail-latency amplification. While median latency remains competitive on simple topologies, p99.9 latency diverges significantly due to allocation-driven garbage collection pauses. Across evaluated dimensions, this divergence ranges from one order of magnitude on simple chains to multiple orders of magnitude on dense topologies such as the diamond mesh — allocation-driven GC pauses being a well-known source of latency jitter in managed runtimes.

Table 8 reports measured p50 and p99.9 values obtained from HDR histograms collected during steady-state benchmark runs, rounded to the nearest nanosecond for readability.

Table 8: Tail Latency Summary — Representative Dimensions
Topology | Fluxtion p50 (ns) | Fluxtion p99.9 (ns) | RxJava p50 (ns) | RxJava p99.9 (ns)
deep_path (depth 100) | ~363 | ~375 | ~214 | ~2,500
dirty_filter (size 100) | ~98 | ~100 | ~559 | ~5,200
diamond_mesh (101 nodes) | ~197 | ~200 | ~281,000 | ~900,000

These results highlight a key property of execution inference: by eliminating runtime allocation and dynamic dispatch structures, Fluxtion provides not only low average latency but also highly predictable latency bounds. The ratio of p99.9 to p50 remains below 1.05 across all Fluxtion dimensions, a property critical for real-time and high-frequency workloads where a single tail event can breach a multi-cycle SLA. This predictability is a direct consequence of execution inference: because the execution schedule is fixed at compile time and no runtime dependency tracking or allocation occurs, both execution cost and latency variance are structurally bounded.

5.8 Dispatch Cost Profile: Simple Topology Baselines
With the updated benchmark suite, the only dimension where RxJava consistently outperforms Fluxtion across all sizes is deep_path, where identical lambda types allow RxJava's JIT to collapse the chain aggressively. On hot_path and polymorphic (from size 10), intermediate_handlers, and multi_event_path (market and trade events at size 20+), Fluxtion is measurably faster. The allocation data confirms that RxJava's apparent speed advantage on shallow chains is partially masked by GC interference — at depth 100 RxJava allocates 1,264 B/op vs Fluxtion's ≈0, producing substantially higher GC pressure over a sustained run. Tables 5 and 6 consolidate the measured results with allocation data and explicit winner annotation per row.

Table 5: Micro-benchmark Results — Linear and Simple Topologies (Fluxtion B/op ≈0 throughout)
Benchmark | Size | Fluxtion (ns/op) | RxJava (ns/op) | RxJava B/op | Winner
Deep Path | 5 | 47.7 | 43.1 | 136 | RxJava (1.1×)
Deep Path | 10 | 60.9 | 53.9 | 184 | RxJava (1.1×)
Deep Path | 20 | 77.4 | 72.6 | 304 | RxJava (1.1×)
Deep Path | 50 | 210.7 | 119.3 | 664 | RxJava (1.8×)
Deep Path | 100 | 362.8 | 213.8 | 1,264 | RxJava (1.7×)
Polymorphic | 5 | 76.6 | 68.3 | 248 | RxJava (1.1×)
Polymorphic | 10 | 84.0 | 84.3 | 368 | Tie
Polymorphic | 20 | 117.5 | 128.7 | 608 | Fluxtion (1.1×)
Polymorphic | 50 | 219.5 | 455.1 | 1,330 | Fluxtion (2.1×)
Polymorphic | 100 | 392.3 | 645.1 | 2,531 | Fluxtion (1.6×)
Hot Path | 2 branches | 66.3 | 81.0 | 392 | Fluxtion (1.2×)
Hot Path | 4 branches | 68.8 | 84.5 | 440 | Fluxtion (1.2×)
Hot Path | 8 branches | 77.3 | 111.9 | 536 | Fluxtion (1.4×)
Hot Path | 16 branches | 87.8 | 160.9 | 728 | Fluxtion (1.8×)
Hot Path | 32 branches | 116.5 | 244.7 | 1,112 | Fluxtion (2.1×)
Intermediate Handlers | 10 | 73.4 | 111.1 | 376 | Fluxtion (1.5×)
Intermediate Handlers | 20 | 81.0 | 170.5 | 616 | Fluxtion (2.1×)
Intermediate Handlers | 50 | 128.3 | 329.4 | 1,337 | Fluxtion (2.6×)
Intermediate Handlers | 100 | 210.7 | 584.4 | 2,537 | Fluxtion (2.8×)

Table 6: Multi-Event Path — Three Strongly-Typed Event Types (Fluxtion B/op ≈0 throughout)
Graph size | Fluxtion Control | Fluxtion Market | Fluxtion Trade | RxJava Control | RxJava Market | RxJava Trade
5 | 62.5 | 71.8 | 65.5 | 44.0 | 70.7 | 66.4
10 | 65.9 | 80.9 | 76.5 | 45.2 | 81.9 | 66.7
20 | 72.4 | 84.0 | 84.2 | 48.5 | 119.4 | 84.3
50 | 83.9 | 238.0 | 130.5 | 50.9 | 441.7 | 141.2

The fixed overhead in Fluxtion's dispatch path arises from the structure of the generated processor: the entry method performs a type-guard check before delegating to the inlined execution schedule, and the isDirty() guards at each node represent evaluations that a fully push-based reactive pipeline can sometimes bypass when no filtering is required. On short chains where total computational work is small, these fixed costs represent a larger fraction of total execution time. RxJava's operator chains benefit from aggressive JIT specialization for trivial identical lambda types — an advantage that disappears when lambda types diversify (polymorphic) or when fan-out structure prevents full inlining (hot_path). The @ExportService direct-call path (Short Chain rows in Table 5) performs within 2 ns of the standard onEvent path for single-event processors, confirming that service interface dispatch carries negligible additional overhead; the structural API-safety benefit of typed service interfaces is therefore available at no measurable runtime cost.

5.9 Discussion: Cost Profile and Architectural Trade-offs
These results establish a clear and consistent cost model for execution inference. Fluxtion's compiled dispatcher underperforms RxJava on deep_path linear chains where RxJava's JIT collapses identical-lambda sequences into near-loop execution. This is the one consistent exception in the current benchmark suite, and is a known and deliberate architectural trade-off: the compilation model is designed for production event graphs of tens to hundreds of nodes, and the zero-allocation and glitch-free guarantees are structural properties that cannot be selectively enabled at runtime. For the workloads Fluxtion targets — dense dependency graphs, high-frequency noisy data feeds, and safety-critical edge deployments requiring deterministic replay — these properties are non-negotiable requirements rather than optional optimizations. While the constant-factor overhead of Fluxtion's type-guards is visible in trivial 5-node chains, this entry tax becomes negligible as graph complexity and total computational work per event cycle increase.
The performance characteristics improve with topological complexity: the dirty_filter advantage grows from 1.4× to 5.7× as graph depth increases from 10 to 100 nodes; the diamond mesh result illustrates that at sufficient connection density the difference becomes qualitative rather than quantitative. In production deployments, event graphs with tens to several hundred nodes are typical, placing operational workloads firmly in the regime where Fluxtion's structural properties provide measurable advantage. The zero-allocation guarantee remains constant across all graph sizes and topologies and is of particular importance for GC-sensitive edge and trading environments where a single Stop-the-World pause can violate latency SLAs that span multiple event cycles.
(Insert Figure 2: "Performance Across Benchmark Dimensions." A multi-panel chart showing Fluxtion vs. RxJava latency for each dimension, with a logarithmic-scale inset for the diamond mesh result and a grouped-bar inset for the multi-event-type validation results.)


6. Production Experience: Drone Autonomy Case Study
Beyond raw nanosecond performance, the deterministic execution model fundamentally alters the engineering lifecycle. The system described in this paper is currently deployed in production within a proprietary market-making platform operating across multiple cryptocurrency exchanges. Production deployments typically consist of event graphs ranging from tens to several hundred nodes depending on the trading strategy being executed. The drone autonomy case study involved a system of approximately 150 behavioral nodes organized across six functional subsystems (navigation, obstacle avoidance, telemetry, payload control, health monitoring, and mission sequencing). The operational benefits of this model were also illustrated in a recent production project requiring the replication of complex autonomous drone behavior within a synthetic test environment.
In the original architecture, which relied on non-deterministic event frameworks, debugging was an exercise in log-diving through asynchronous callback traces. Implementing the drone autonomy logic in that environment took the original engineering team six man-months. The primary bottleneck was not the business logic itself, but rather the cognitive overhead of managing the orchestration code—the "plumbing." Developers had to constantly context-switch between the primary application code and a secondary configuration DSL used to define the event routing topologies, manually ensuring the two remained in sync.
Using Fluxtion, the exact same autonomous behavior was re-implemented in five man-days. Critically, this re-implementation benefited from the prior six-month effort: the domain logic and behavioral requirements were already fully understood. The reduction from six man-months to five man-days therefore reflects the elimination of coordination plumbing overhead and the improved debuggability afforded by deterministic replay — not a compression of initial domain analysis.
Table 1: Autonomous Drone R&D Lifecycle Comparison
Metric
Traditional Architecture (Non-Deterministic)
Fluxtion Architecture (Deterministic)

Execution Model
Dynamic Routing, Asynchronous Callbacks
Compiled, Inferred Coordination

Debugging Method
Log-diving, State Reconstruction
Deterministic Replay, High-Fidelity Reproduction

Time to Delivery
6 Man-Months
5 Man-Days

Several factors contributed to this reduction in delivery time. In the original architecture, reproducing failures required reconstructing asynchronous execution traces from fragmented logs. Because the ordering of callbacks depended on runtime thread scheduling, the same event sequence often produced radically different execution paths.
Crucially, the productivity gains were heavily driven by the removal of the secondary coordination DSL. By inferring the execution intent directly from the application's object structure, Fluxtion eliminated the code-to-config drift that had plagued the original team. Developers no longer had to write or debug explicit wiring logic; they simply authored the behavioral nodes and allowed the compiler to synthesize the deterministic dispatch paths.
Under Fluxtion, deterministic replay enabled automated regression testing that had been difficult to achieve in the previous system. The same recorded event sequence could be reused as a regression corpus against subsequent processor versions. Replaying a recorded event stream reproduces the exact same propagation path every time because the execution schedule is fixed by the dependency structure. If a state anomaly occurred in the field, operators could inject the recorded event stream into a local debugger and step through the exact sequence of node activations. This transformed a stochastic debugging nightmare into a reproducible debugging process, offloading the cognitive burden of asynchronous state management entirely to the compiler.
6.1 Lessons Learned
Our operational experience with Fluxtion yielded several broader architectural takeaways for the engineering of high-performance event-driven systems.
First, in complex event networks, the primary engineering bottleneck often shifts from CPU constraints to developer cognitive load. By shifting coordination logic to the compiler, Fluxtion generates graph visualizations and execution traces directly at compile time. Because these diagnostic artifacts are structurally identical to the generated code, developers rely on a single, consistent source of truth for fault finding, substantially reducing the mental burden of tracking asynchronous state.
Second, building reliable autonomous systems is exceedingly difficult when execution paths are stochastic (e.g., randomized by thread scheduling). The drone project highlighted the importance of deterministic replay for safely deploying edge logic. However, this replay relies on a strict data-driven clock, where event timestamps dictate the logical progression of system time. Combined with the rigid compiled schedule, this enables true "time-travel" debugging with high-fidelity reproduction of field anomalies.
Finally, relinquishing the ability to dynamically inject new routing rules at runtime is a highly favorable trade-off for latency-sensitive and safety-critical edge systems. The structural predictability, automated regression testing, and mechanical sympathy gained from a closed-world graph assumption consistently outweigh the loss of dynamic runtime flexibility.
7. Related Work
Fluxtion sits at the intersection of several established paradigms, but diverges significantly in its execution strategy for latency-sensitive edge environments.
Reactive Streams and Observer-Based Frameworks (e.g., RxJava, Project Reactor, Akka Streams) prioritize asynchronous composability and backpressure. While highly flexible, these frameworks rely heavily on dynamic subscription registries and often incur additional allocation and wrapping overhead across pipeline stages. This introduces an abstraction tax and GC pressure that often make such frameworks ill-suited to nanosecond-bound applications.
Distributed Stream Processing Engines (e.g., Apache Flink, Apache Storm, Kafka Streams) excel at fault-tolerant, high-throughput processing across distributed clusters. However, they are designed for millisecond-scale, inter-node coordination rather than nanosecond-scale, intra-process execution. Fluxtion does not compete in distributed orchestration; rather, it occupies the single-node, ultra-low-latency niche, executing logic orders of magnitude faster than a distributed engine's localized operator.
Unlike traditional middleware [4, 5] which relies on these dynamic registries and asynchronous queues, Fluxtion derives its execution graph from a conventional component object graph and compiles the resulting dependency structure into a specialized in-process event processor.
Fluxtion shares a deeper conceptual lineage with Synchronous Dataflow (SDF) languages like Lustre or Esterel [3], which enforce strict deterministic clock-based execution. However, Fluxtion adapts these deterministic scheduling principles to standard general-purpose environments via structural introspection. It also complements high-performance messaging transports like the LMAX Disruptor [1] and Aeron [2]; while these frameworks provide a lock-free or reliable transport pipe, Fluxtion infers and compiles the formal coordination logic for the application sitting at the end of that pipe.
Another related research lineage is Incremental and Self-Adjusting Computation [6, 7], such as differential dataflow, which seeks to minimize recomputation by propagating only the portions of a computation affected by input changes. While Fluxtion shares the goal of minimizing recomputation via sub-graph pruning, it approaches the problem statically. Rather than maintaining dynamic dependency tracking structures or complex state-matching at runtime, Fluxtion derives dependency relationships during execution inference and implements selective propagation using compiled, low-overhead boolean guards. Systems such as differential dataflow [7] and self-adjusting computation [6] maintain runtime change-propagation structures updated dynamically as inputs change, enabling graphs with dynamic structure or data-dependent computation patterns. Fluxtion's static model is complementary: it targets graphs whose structure is fixed at compile time, trading runtime flexibility for the elimination of all runtime dependency tracking overhead and the structural guarantee of zero heap allocation in steady state. Crucially, Fluxtion eliminates runtime dependency tracking entirely by resolving all propagation paths statically at compile time — a distinction that is fundamental rather than incremental.
8. Conclusion and Future Work
Fluxtion demonstrates that treating event propagation as a formal compilation target allows structural program descriptions to be transformed into highly predictable, low-latency execution pipelines. By shifting from explicitly authored orchestration to compiler-inferred coordination, systems achieve nanosecond-scale performance, zero-allocation steady states, and material reductions in the R&D lifecycle. Critically, the zero-allocation property — achieved by pre-allocating all component instances at compile time and processing events entirely via in-place field mutation — means the system sustains indefinite operation in GC-sensitive environments without a single heap object created during steady-state dispatch.
Future work will explore formalizing execution inference as an adjunction in category theory, establishing a mathematical mapping between structural topology and synthesized execution schedules. We will also investigate dynamic hardware-aware sub-graph relocation and extend the compiler to generate target code directly for FPGA bitstreams (VHDL/Verilog). Additionally, we plan to embed lightweight neural networks directly into the deterministic graph as compiled procedural nodes, merging deterministic safety with learned adaptability.
More broadly, Fluxtion suggests that closed event-processing graphs can be compiled into deterministic processors that combine low execution overhead with improved operational transparency.


9. References
[1] Thompson, M., Farley, D., Barker, M., Gee, P., & Stewart, A. (2011). "The LMAX Disruptor: High performance alternative to bounded queues for exchanging data between concurrent threads." LMAX Exchange.
[2] Real Logic. (2023). "Aeron: Efficient reliable UDP unicast, UDP multicast, and IPC message transport." GitHub Repository.
[3] Halbwachs, N., Caspi, P., Raymond, P., & Pilaud, D. (1991). "The synchronous data flow programming language LUSTRE." Proceedings of the IEEE, 79(9), 1305-1320.
[4] Eugster, P. T., Felber, P. A., Guerraoui, R., & Kermarrec, A. M. (2003). "The many faces of publish/subscribe." ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 35(2), 114-131.
[5] Cugola, G., & Margara, A. (2012). "Processing flows of information: From data stream to complex event processing." ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 44(3), 1-62.
[6] Acar, U. A. (2005). "Self-adjusting computation." ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 37(2), 147-204.
[7] McSherry, F., Isaacs, R., Isard, M., & Murray, D. G. (2013). "Differential dataflow." CIDR.
[8] Hasselbring, W. (2000). "Information system integration." Communications of the ACM, 43(6), 32-38.
[9] Cormen, T. H., Leiserson, C. E., Rivest, R. L., & Stein, C. (2009). "Introduction to Algorithms." 3rd ed. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

